512
CHAPTER 8. CODE GENERATION
the problem by generating code for the three-address statements in the order in which they have been produced by the intermediate code generator. In Chapter 10, we shall study code scheduling for pipelined machines that can execute several operations in a single clock cycle.
8.2 The Target Language
Familiarity with the target machine and its instruction set is a prerequisite for designing a good code generator. Unfortunately, in a general discussion of code generation it is not possible to describe any target machine in sufficient detail to generate good code for a complete language on that machine. In this chapter, we shall use as a target language assembly code for a simple computer that is representative of many register machines. However, the code generation techniques presented in this chapter can be used on many other classes of machines as well.
8.2.1 A Simple Target Machine Model
Our target computer models a three-address machine with load and store oper-ations, computation operations, jump operations, and conditional jumps. The underlying computer is a byte-addressable machine with n general-purpose reg-isters, RO, R1,..., Rn 1. A full-fledged assembly language would have scores of instructions. To avoid hiding the concepts in a myriad of details, we shall use a very limited set of instructions and assume that all operands are integers. Most instructions consists of an operator, followed by a target, followed by a list of source operands. A label may precede an instruction. We assume the following kinds of instructions are available:
Load operations: The instruction LD dst, addr loads the value in location addr into location dst. This instruction denotes the assignment dst = addr. The most common form of this instruction is LD r, z which loads the value in location z into register r. An instruction of the form LD 71, 72 is a register-to-register copy in which the contents of register 72 are copied into register r1.
Store operations: The instruction ST z,r stores the value in register r into the location z. This instruction denotes the assignment = r.
Computation operations of the form OP dst, src₁, srce, where OP is a op-erator like ADD or SUB, and dst, sre, and sre₂ are locations, not necessarily distinct. The effect of this machine instruction is to apply the operation represented by OP to the values in locations sre, and sre₂, and place the result of this operation in location dst. For example, SUB 71, 72, 73 com-putes r r3. Any value formerly stored in ri is lost, but if ry is r2 or r3, the old value is read first. Unary operators that take only one operand do not have a srca. = 72
